[blog] MUI X v5 blog post (#29590)
mui-org/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v5.md

          Toolbar: MyCustomToolbar,
        }}
      />
    </div>
  );
}
```

**After**

```jsx
const useStyles = makeStyles(() => ({
  root: {
    padding: 50,
  },
}));

const MyCustomToolbar = () => {
  const classes = useStyles();

  return (
    <GridToolbarContainer className={classes.root}>
      My custom toolbar
    </GridToolbarContainer>
  );
};

export default function App() {
  return (
    <div style={{ height: 400, width: '100%' }}>
      <DataGrid
        components={{
          Toolbar: MyCustomToolbar,
        }}
      />
    </div>
  );
}
```

#### Limitations

Although this was a clear improvement we still had to keep the style specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, more specifically the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all components that are nested in them.
This is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects styles into the page.
To keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal we decided to keep the CSS specificity of 2 for the mentioned components.

## Features highlights

<!-- TODO: add subsections for the features we want to mentune, if any -->

> ## v4 migration

Author: @flaviendelangle should we also add part or all of the migration guides you did here?

Author: added

date: 2021-11-12T00:00:00.000Z
authors:
  ['oliviertassinari', 'm4theushw', 'flaviendelangle', 'DanailH', 'alexfauquette']
card: true
---

We are excited to introduce [MUI X v5.0.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases/tag/v5.0.0)!

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5/card.png" alt="" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

This release features some major highlights:

- [High-level goals for v5](#high-level-goals-for-v5)
- [A new virtualization engine](#a-new-virtualization-engine)
- [Improved state management](#improved-state-management)
  - [Improve the developer experience around the state](#improve-the-developer-experience-around-the-state)
  - [Synchronous state initialization](#synchronous-state-initialization)
- [Reduced style specificity for easier customization](#reduced-style-specificity-for-easier-customization)
  - [Limitations](#limitations)
- [v4 migration](#v4-migration)
- [What's next?](#whats-next)
  - [Public roadmap](#public-roadmap)
- [Thank you](#thank-you)

## High-level goals for v5

## A new virtualization engine

The `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features a brand-new virtualization engine.

> We decided to rewrite it completely to address the many issues raised by the community and to make easier to release new features that impact the rendering of rows and columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to rewrite it completely to address the many issues raised by the community, and to make easier to release new features that impact the rendering of rows and columns.
```

The result of these actions is on the bottom part of the comparison.
The number of frames that could be drawn in the same amount of time dramatically increased, compared to the previous virtualization.
In our [benchmark](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/pull/2673), the FPS (frames per second) went from 22 to 42, on average.
The time each frame takes to be rendered, indicated by the width of each block, was reduced.
The idea of delaying the re-rendering also can be seen in the large voids between the blocks.
Each void means that a re-render was not necessary since the required columns were already rendered by the overscan.

![Performance comparison between v5.0.0-beta.4 and v5.0.0](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42154031/141475697-11281f83-9a2f-4a2b-8001-f459cbdccbd8.png)

Some of the mentioned improvements were also applied to the rows, however, the gains were more subtle.
Besides the better performance, the new virtualization also brings the following fixes:

- Horizontal and vertical scroll share the same logic
- No more jumps when changing the rendered rows
- Calling `apiRef.current.scrollToIndexes` works no matter where the cell is

> - Improved support for when virtualization is disabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improved support for when virtualization is disabled.
```
Improved support for what?

- Fix keyboard navigation with arrow keys.

## Improved state management

Several improvements were made to our state management to improve developer experience, performances and consistency in the execution order.

#### Improve the developer experience around the state

To improve developer experience for both the X-team and developers using the `apiRef` features, we are working on making the state structure and the tools to access it as easy to understand as possible.

> - We removed the `state` structure from the public API. Access data in the state should always be done through `apiRef` methods (`apiRef.current.getSelectedRows`) or selectors (`selectedGridRowsSelector`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We removed the `state` structure from the public API. Access to data in the state should always be done through `apiRef` methods (`apiRef.current.getSelectedRows`) or selectors (`selectedGridRowsSelector`).
```

> - We renamed most selectors to have a consistent naming convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We renamed most selectors to have a consistent naming convention, making it easier to deduce their name or infer purpose.
```

> - We restructured our state so that each feature has a single sub state and is the only one to update it (`state.filter` is only managed by our `useGridFilter` hooks which exposes methods for both internal and 3rd party code to interact with this state).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We restructured our state so that each feature has a single substate, and is the only one to update it (`state.filter` is only managed by our `useGridFilter` hooks which exposes methods for both internal and 3rd party code to interact with this state).
```

> The work on that topic is far from over. We have several topics on progress or under discussion to improve the developing experience of people using the advanced features of the grid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The work on that topic is far from over. We have several developments in progress or under discussion to improve the developer experience when using the advanced features of the grid.
```

Here are a few that should be release in the following months:

> - Strict typing of the event listeners and publishers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Strict typing of event listeners and publishers.
```

> - Examples for the event listeners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Examples for the event listeners.
```

> - Documentation and examples for the selectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Documentation and examples for selectors.
```

> - Ability to simplify export and restore some parts of the grid state

Reviewer: Add the ability to, or simplify the process of?

Author: Updated: `Add the ability to export and restore some parts of the grid state.`

#### Synchronous state initialization

> In the previous versions, the state was at first populated with default values, and then in a `useEffect`, we were applying the values given as props (`props.pageSize` for instance) or derived from the props (the sorted and filtered rows derived from the `props.rows`, `props.sortModel` and `props.filterModel`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In previous versions, the state was first populated with default values, and then in a `useEffect`, given the values provided as props (`props.pageSize` for instance), or derived from the props (the sorted and filtered rows derived from the `props.rows`, `props.sortModel` and `props.filterModel`).
```

> This was causing an additional re-render with useless data and the X-team had to stay careful to avoid flickering between those fake data and the real ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was causing an additional render with useless data, and the we had to be careful to avoid flickering between the fake and real data.
```

In v5, the state is initialized synchronously during the first render.

> Note that for now the state updates coming from controlled props are still asynchronous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that for now, the state updates coming from controlled props are still asynchronous.
```

> If you pass a `props.pageSize`, we will apply it to the state in a `useEffect` and therefore is you read the state just after the render (for instance in a `useLayoutEffect`), you will still see the old version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you pass `props.pageSize`, we will apply it to the state in a `useEffect`, and therefore if you read the state just after the render (for instance in a `useLayoutEffect`), you will still see the old version.
```

## Reduced style specificity for easier customization

> In previous versions most of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a CSS specificity of 2, meaning that style overrides and customizations were harder, requiring the developer to look at the DOM tree in order to pick the correct selector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In previous versions most of the various `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a CSS specificity of 2, meaning that style overrides and customizations were harder, requiring you to look at the DOM tree in order to pick the correct selector.
```
"you" assumes that the reader is a developer, and addresses them directly.

> With MUI X v5.0.0 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With MUI X v5 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1.
```

This will enable developers to more easily change the look and feel of the grid's components.

**Before**

```jsx
const useStyles = makeStyles(() => ({
  root: {
    '& .MuiDataGrid-toolbarContainer': {
      padding: 50,
    },
  },
}));

const MyCustomToolbar = () => {
  return <GridToolbarContainer>My custom toolbar</GridToolbarContainer>;
};

export default function App() {
  const classes = useStyles();

  return (
    <div style={{ height: 400, width: '100%' }} className={classes.root}>
      <DataGrid
        components={{
          Toolbar: MyCustomToolbar,
        }}
      />
    </div>
  );
}
```

**After**

```jsx
const useStyles = makeStyles(() => ({
  root: {
    padding: 50,
  },
}));

const MyCustomToolbar = () => {
  const classes = useStyles();

  return (
    <GridToolbarContainer className={classes.root}>
      My custom toolbar
    </GridToolbarContainer>
  );
};

export default function App() {
  return (
    <div style={{ height: 400, width: '100%' }}>
      <DataGrid
        components={{
          Toolbar: MyCustomToolbar,
        }}
      />
    </div>
  );
}
```

#### Limitations

> Although this was a clear improvement we still had to keep the style specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, more specifically the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all components that are nested in them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although this was a clear improvement, we still had to keep a style specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, specifically the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all of the components that are nested in them.
```

> This is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects styles into the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects styles into the page,
```

> To keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal we decided to keep the CSS specificity of 2 for the mentioned components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and was necessary to keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal.
```

## v4 migration

> We strongly recommend you migrate MUI X to v5. In MUI X v5 we have not only added additional features but also spent time to do internal improvements and performance optimizations that we won't be included in v4. All new `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features will be only available on MUI X v5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We strongly recommend you migrate MUI X to v5. In MUI X v5 we have not only added additional features but also made significant internal improvements and performance optimizations that won't be included in v4. All new `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features will be only available in MUI X v5.
```

> We strongly recommend you migrate both MUI X to v5. In MUI X v5 we have not only added additional features but also spent time to do internal improvements and performance optimizations that we won't be included in v4. All new `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features will be only available on MUI X v5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We strongly recommend you migrate both MUI X and MUI Core to v5. In MUI X v5 we have not only added additional features but also spent time to do internal improvements and performance optimizations that we won't be included in v4. All new `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features will be only available on MUI X v5.
```

Or

```suggestion
We strongly recommend you migrate MUI Xto v5. In MUI X v5 we have not only added additional features but also spent time to do internal improvements and performance optimizations that we won't be included in v4. All new `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features will be only available on MUI X v5.
```

Author: second one, thanks for the catch

You can check [this page](https://mui.com/components/data-grid/migration-v4/) to learn more about migrating to v5.

## What's next?

More exciting things are coming! We have big plans for the rest of this quarter in terms of features we expect to release in both the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components. Features such as **tree data**, **column pinning**, and **variable row height** are part of our roadmap.

### Public roadmap

You can view our public roadmap on GitHub to learn about what features we're working on, what stage they're at, and when we expect to bring them to you:

- [MUI X](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/projects/1)

## Thank you

Finally, one last thank you to everyone who's contributed to MUI X v5.

> We are very excited about this release and we will continue to push forward and deliver the next generation of Enterprise React UI components!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're very excited about this release, and we'll continue to push forward and deliver the next generation of Enterprise React UI components!
```

---
title: Introducing MUI X v5.0
description: We are excited to introduce MUI X v5.0.0!

> date: 2021-11-12T00:00:00.000Z

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: 2021-11-22T00:00:00.000Z
```

authors:
  ['oliviertassinari', 'm4theushw', 'flaviendelangle', 'DanailH', 'alexfauquette']
card: true
---

> We are excited to introduce [MUI X v5.0.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases/tag/v5.0.0)!

Author: Yes, I agree, when I was preparing the content a couple of times I felt weird talking about MUI X and DataGrid because at the moment they are the same.

> <img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5/card.png" alt="" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

Reviewer 4: @mui-org/x v5.0.0 is broke. Should we change to v5.0.1 or announce as v5.0.0 but users will actually install v5.0.1?

Author: I think it's still valid to leave it as it is. We will have a patch so it will be installed automatically.

> [MUI X](https://mui.com/x/) is our collection of advanced components (with both MIT and commercially licensed "Pro" features), that includes a data grid, date picker, and tree view. This release continues our focus on making the data grid the best in the industry. Read on to learn more!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[MUI X](/x/) is our collection of advanced components (with both MIT and commercially licensed "Pro" features), that includes a data grid, date picker, and tree view. This release continues our focus on making the data grid the best in the industry. Read on to learn more!
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5/card.png" alt="" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

This release features some major highlights:

> - [High-level goals for v5](#high-level-goals-for-v5)

Author: I don't see this section anymore. I can restore it if we want to have a note about why are we doing this.

- [A new virtualization engine](#a-new-virtualization-engine)
- [Improved state management](#improved-state-management)
  - [Improving the developer experience around the state](#improving-the-developer-experience-around-the-state)
  - [Synchronous state initialization](#synchronous-state-initialization)
- [Reduced style specificity for easier customization](#reduced-style-specificity-for-easier-customization)
  - [Limitations](#limitations)
- [v4 migration](#v4-migration)
- [What's next?](#whats-next)
  - [Public roadmap](#public-roadmap)
- [Thank you](#thank-you)

## A new virtualization engine

`DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` now feature a brand-new virtualization engine!

> We decided to rewrite it completely to address the many issues raised by the community, and to make easier to release new features that impact the rendering of rows and columns.

Reviewer 4: We could have expanded on "overridden scroll vs native scroll". The remaining issues (e.g. blank spaces, wrong `scrollTop` and incorrect `key` value) were caused when patching something on top of another patch. I don't know a friendly way to explain that.

The time each frame takes to be rendered, indicated by the width of each block, was reduced.

The idea of delaying the re-rendering also can be seen in the large voids between the blocks.
Each void means that a re-render was not necessary since the required columns were already rendered by the overscan.

![Performance comparison between v5.0.0-beta.4 and v5.0.0](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42154031/141475697-11281f83-9a2f-4a2b-8001-f459cbdccbd8.png)

Some of the mentioned improvements were also applied to the rows, however the gains were more subtle.
Besides the better performance, the new virtualization engine also brings the following fixes:

- Horizontal and vertical scroll share the same logic.
- No more jumps when changing the rendered rows.
- Calling `apiRef.current.scrollToIndexes` works no matter where the cell is.
- Improved support for when `disableVirtualization` is used.
- Fixes keyboard navigation with arrow keys.

## Improved state management

Several enhancements were made to state management to improve developer experience, performance and consistency in the execution order.

> #### Improving the developer experience around the state

Reviewer 3: this is an h4, the parent is an h2. This is both 1. wrong for accessibility (added to https://www.notion.so/mui-org/Technical-documentation-7e55b517ac2e489a9ddb6d0f6dd765de) and 2. breaking the TOC.

x the other instances

Reviewer 3: Also, we could shorten the header, it's long, the tense is different from the other headers, "around" is vague, we could make it more concrete:
```suggestion
### Improved DX when using the state
```

> To improve developer experience for both the X-team and developers using the `apiRef` features, we are working on making the state structure and the tools to access it as easy to understand as possible.

Reviewer 3: - I don't think that we should mention the wins for the maintainers. It's all about our users.
- It's already done

```suggestion
To improve the developer experience when using the `apiRef` methods, we worked on making the state structure and the tools to access it as easy to understand as possible.
```

- We removed the `state` structure from the public API. Access to data in the state should always be done through `apiRef` methods (`apiRef.current.getSelectedRows`) or selectors (`selectedGridRowsSelector`).
- We renamed most selectors to have a consistent naming convention, making it easier to deduce their name or infer purpose.

> - We restructured our state so that each feature has a single substate, and is the only one to update it (`state.filter` is only managed by our `useGridFilter` hooks which exposes methods for both internal and 3rd party code to interact with this state).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- We restructured our state so that each feature has a single sub-state, and the feature hook is the only one to update it (e.g. `state.filter` is only managed by the `useGridFilter` hook, which exposes methods for both internal and 3rd party code to interact with this state).
```

> The work on that topic is far from over. We have several developments in progress or under discussion to improve the developer experience when using the advanced features of the grid.

Reviewer 3: To reduce the fear of future BCs for the readers?

```suggestion
The work on this topic isn't over. We have several developments in progress or under discussion to improve the developer experience when using the advanced features of the grid.
```

Here are a few that should be release in the following months:

- Strict typing of event listeners and publishers.
- Examples for the event listeners.
- Documentation and examples for selectors.
- Add the ability to export and restore some parts of the grid state.

#### Synchronous state initialization

In previous versions, the state was first populated with default values, and then in a `useEffect`, given the values provided as props (`props.pageSize` for instance), or derived from the props (the sorted and filtered rows derived from the `props.rows`, `props.sortModel` and `props.filterModel`).

> This was causing an additional render with useless data, and the we had to be careful to avoid flickering between the fake and real data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This was causing an additional render with useless data, and then we had to be careful to avoid flickering between the fake and real data.
```

In v5, the state is initialized synchronously during the first render.

Note that for now, the state updates coming from controlled props are still asynchronous.
If you pass `props.pageSize`, we will apply it to the state in a `useEffect`, and therefore if you read the state just after the render (for instance in a `useLayoutEffect`), you will still see the old version.

> ## Reduced style specificity for easier customization

Reviewer 3: Could this header be too long? Instead of easier, maybe simpler would be even better (simpler/complex !== easier/harder). 

```suggestion
## Simpler style customization
```

> In previous versions most of the various `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a CSS specificity of 2, meaning that style overrides and customizations were harder, requiring you to look at the DOM tree in order to pick the correct selector.

Reviewer 3: I believe most that backend developers have no ideas what CSS specificity means. Also, I think that we could be more specific :

```suggestion
In previous versions, most of the built-in CSS of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a [CSS specificity](https://web.dev/learn/css/specificity/) of 2.
This means that the CSS you would normally add would have less priority than the built-in CSS of the data grid.
This was requiring you to open your dev tools, look at the CSSOM tree in order to use the correct selector.
```

> With MUI X v5 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1.
> This will enable developers to more easily change the look and feel of the grid's components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With MUI X v5 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1.
This enables developers to more easily change the look and feel of the grid's components.
```

**Before**

```jsx
const useStyles = makeStyles(() => ({
  root: {
    '& .MuiDataGrid-toolbarContainer': {
      padding: 50,
    },
  },
}));

const MyCustomToolbar = () => {
  return <GridToolbarContainer>My custom toolbar</GridToolbarContainer>;
};

export default function App() {
  const classes = useStyles();

  return (
    <div style={{ height: 400, width: '100%' }} className={classes.root}>
      <DataGrid
        components={{
          Toolbar: MyCustomToolbar,
        }}
      />
    </div>
  );
}
```

**After**

```jsx

> const useStyles = makeStyles(() => ({

Reviewer 3: `makeStyles`'s API is deprecated, could we use the `styled()` API instead?

Also, people can now used the sx `prop`

Author: Updated

  root: {
    padding: 50,
  },
}));

const MyCustomToolbar = () => {
  const classes = useStyles();

  return (
    <GridToolbarContainer className={classes.root}>
      My custom toolbar
    </GridToolbarContainer>
  );
};

export default function App() {
  return (
    <div style={{ height: 400, width: '100%' }}>
      <DataGrid
        components={{
          Toolbar: MyCustomToolbar,
        }}
      />
    </div>
  );
}
```

#### Limitations

> Although this was a clear improvement, we still had to keep a style specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, specifically the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all of the components that are nested in them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although this was a clear improvement, we still had to keep a CSS specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, specifically the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all of the components that are nested in them.
```

> This is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects styles into the page,

Reviewer 3: The official capitalization, at least, from what I understood the last time I asked them:

```suggestion
This is due to performance implications related to how [emotion](https://emotion.sh/) injects styles into the page,
```

and was necessary to keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal.

## v4 migration

> We strongly recommend you migrate MUI X to v5. In MUI X v5 we have not only added additional features but also made significant internal improvements and performance optimizations that won't be included in v4. All new `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features will be only available in MUI X v5.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We strongly recommend you migrate MUI X to v5.
In MUI X v5 we have not only added additional features but also made significant internal improvements and performance optimizations that won't be included in v4.
All-new `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features will be only available in MUI X v5.
```

> You can check [this page](https://mui.com/components/data-grid/migration-v4/) to learn more about migrating to v5.

Reviewer 3: Since we are on the same domain, this could be simpler:

```suggestion
You can check [this page](/components/data-grid/migration-v4/) to learn more about migrating to v5.
```

## What's next?

More exciting things are coming! We have big plans for the rest of this quarter in terms of features we expect to release in both the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components. Features such as **tree data**, **column pinning**, and **variable row height** are part of our roadmap.

### Public roadmap

You can view our public roadmap on GitHub to learn about what features we're working on, what stage they're at, and when we expect to bring them to you:

> - [MUI X](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/projects/1)

Reviewer 3: A header and a ul > li feel alone here. If we don't plan to add more content, we can remove them

Reviewer 3: I think that we could share our longer-term plan in this section, we talk 2021 only. We could share what we have in mind before v6. I think that a bias on the why can help. It's then easier for developers to emphasize with us, and so we don't have to provide too many specific details (that we might not do, changing our mind)

Author: Noted - I reworked the sentence a but to remove the `ul > li`.
Regarding expanding the section with our long-term goal - I would love to do that but I don't think we have discussed the long-term goal with the team so maybe it's better to first define it between ourselves.

---
title: Introducing MUI X v5.0
description: We are excited to introduce MUI X v5.0.0!
date: 2021-11-12T00:00:00.000Z
authors:
  ['oliviertassinari', 'm4theushw', 'flaviendelangle', 'DanailH', 'alexfauquette']
card: true
---

We are excited to introduce [MUI X v5.0.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases/tag/v5.0.0)!

<!-- TODO: upload a MUI X v5 specific banner -->
<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5/card.png" alt="" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

> This release features some major highlights:

Reviewer: Not sure "High-level goals" is a highlight :)

Author: I took the structure from here https://mui.com/blog/mui-core-v5/. Granted the `Thank you` is not on the list there. I will remove it. Not sure what to do for with rest.

- [Reduced style specificity for easier customization](#reduced-style-specificity-for-easier-customization)
  - [Limitations](#limitations)
- [Features highlights](#features-highlights)
- [v4 migration](#v4-migration)
  - [Change of the package names](#change-of-the-package-names)
  - [Change of the styling solution](#change-of-the-styling-solution)
- [What's next?](#whats-next)
  - [A public roadmap](#a-public-roadmap)
- [Thank you](#thank-you)

## High-level goals for v5

## A new virtualization engine

The `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features a brand-new virtualization engine.
We decided to rewrite it completely to address the many issues raised by the community and to make easier to release new features that impact the rendering of rows and columns.
One of the many advantages over the previous version is that now we use the native scroll.
This means that scrolling the grid is like scrolling a webpage.
The jittering caused when the scroll is overridden is gone.
Another advatange is that scrolling horizontally will have the same performance as scrolling vertically.

To summarize, the new virtualization has the following features:

> - Scrolling runs at 40 FPS, on average

Reviewer 3: Maybe it would be interesting to share performance recording sessions with before vs. after, to illustrate. When I read this, I get, well 40 FPS is not 60 FPS. What's worth celebrating? Now if we say that it was 20 FPS, then I think that it changes the whole narrative.

Reviewer 4: Comparison between versions added.

I removed the "Scrolling runs at 40 FPS, on average" part. It's not 60 FPS and users don't know the environment where these measures were taken.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a +% in absolute performance could help give a sense of the upside.

- Same performance for horizontal and vertical scroll
- No more jumps when changing the rendered rows
- Better performance on mobile devices
- Calling `apiRef.current.scrollToIndexes` works no matter where the cell is

> - Improved support for when virtualization is disabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Improved support for when virtualization is disabled.
- Fix the keyboard arrow navigation?
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Improved support for when `disableVirtualization` is used.
```

## Improved state management

## Reduced style specificity for easier customization

> In previous versions most of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a CSS specificity of 2, meaning that style overwrites and customizations were harder and required the developer to look at the DOM tree in order to pick the correct selector. With MUI X v5.0.0 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1. This will enable developers to more easily change the look and feel of the grid's components.

Reviewer 3: Could we add a demo that illustrates it?

Author: Updated

> In previous versions most of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a CSS specificity of 2, meaning that style overwrites and customizations were harder and required the developer to look at the DOM tree in order to pick the correct selector. With MUI X v5.0.0 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1. This will enable developers to more easily change the look and feel of the grid's components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In previous versions most of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a CSS specificity of 2, meaning that style overwrites and customizations were harder and required the developer to look at the DOM tree in order to pick the correct selector.
With MUI X v5.0.0 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1.
This will enable developers to more easily change the look and feel of the grid's components.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In previous versions most of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components had a CSS specificity of 2, meaning that style overrides and customizations were harder, and required the developer to look at the DOM tree in order to pick the correct selector. With MUI X v5.0.0 we have reduced the CSS specificity of most of the internal `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components to 1. This will enable developers to more easily change the look and feel of the grid's components.
```

#### Limitations

> Although there was a clear improvement we still had to keep the style specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, more specificly the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all components that are nested in them. The reason for this is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects the styles into the page. To keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal we decided to keep the CSS specificity of 2 for the mentioned components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although there was a clear improvement we still had to keep the style specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, more specifically the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all components that are nested in them.
The reason for this is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects the styles into the page.
To keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal we decided to keep the CSS specificity of 2 for the mentioned components.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although this was a clear improvement we still had to keep the style specificity of 2 for some parts of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`, more specifically the `GridColumnHeaderItem`, `GridRow` and `GridCell` along with all components that are nested in them. This is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects styles into the page. To keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal we decided to keep the CSS specificity of 2 for the mentioned components.
```

  - [Change of the styling solution](#change-of-the-styling-solution)
- [What's next?](#whats-next)
  - [A public roadmap](#a-public-roadmap)
- [Thank you](#thank-you)

## High-level goals for v5

## A new virtualization engine

The `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` features a brand-new virtualization engine.
We decided to rewrite it completely to address the many issues raised by the community and to make easier to release new features that impact the rendering of rows and columns.
One of the many advantages over the previous version is that now we use the native scroll.
This means that scrolling the grid is like scrolling a webpage.
The jittering caused when the scroll is overridden is gone.
Another advatange is that scrolling horizontally will have the same performance as scrolling vertically.

To summarize, the new virtualization has the following features:

- Scrolling runs at 40 FPS, on average
- Same performance for horizontal and vertical scroll
- No more jumps when changing the rendered rows
- Better performance on mobile devices
- Calling `apiRef.current.scrollToIndexes` works no matter where the cell is
- Improved support for when virtualization is disabled.

> ## Improved state management

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Improved state management

Several improvements were made to our state management to improve developer experience, performances and consistency in the execution order.

#### Improve the developer experience around the state

To improve developer experience for both the X-team and developers using the `apiRef` features, we are working on making the state structure and the tools to access it as easy to understand as possible.

- We removed the `state` structure from the public API. Access data in the state should always be done through `apiRef` methods (`apiRef.current.getSelectedRows`) or selectors (`selectedGridRowsSelector`).
- We renamed most selectors to have a consistent naming convention
- We restructured our state so that each feature has a single sub state and is the only one to update it (`state.filter` is only managed by our `useGridFilter` hooks which exposes methods for both internal and 3rd party code to interact with this state).

The work on that topic is far from over. We have several topics on progress or under discussion to improve the developing experience of people using the advanced features of the grid.
Here are a few that should be release in the following months:

- Strict typing of the event listeners and publishers
- Examples for the event listeners
- Documentation and examples for the selectors
- Ability to simplify export and restore some parts of the grid state

#### Synchronous state initialization

In the previous versions, the state was at first populated with default values, and then in a `useEffect`, we were applying the values given as props (`props.pageSize` for instance) or derived from the props (the sorted and filtered rows derived from the `props.rows`, `props.sortModel` and `props.filterModel`).
This was causing an additional re-render with useless data and the X-team had to stay careful to avoid flickering between those fake data and the real ones.
In v5, the state is initialized synchronously during the first render.

Note that for now the state updates coming from controlled props are still asynchronous. 
If you pass a `props.pageSize`, we will apply it to the state in a `useEffect` and therefore is you read the state just after the render (for instance in a `useLayoutEffect`), you will still see the old version.
```

We are excited to introduce [MUI X v5.0.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases/tag/v5.0.0)!

[MUI X](/x/) is our collection of advanced components (with both MIT and commercially licensed "Pro" features).

> Currently, it only includes a data grid.

Reviewer: @oliviertassinari They are listed on the X page as released. I questioned it in the X page update PR: https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/28964#pullrequestreview-794371959

The result of these actions is on the bottom part of the comparison.
The number of frames that could be drawn in the same amount of time dramatically increased, compared to the previous virtualization.

> In our benchmark, the FPS (frames per second) went from 20 to 40, on average.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In our [benchmark](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/pull/2673), the FPS (frames per second) went from 22 to 42, on average.
```

- Strict typing of event listeners and publishers.
- Examples for the event listeners.
- Documentation and examples for selectors.

> - Add the ability to export and restore some parts of the grid state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the ability to export and restore some parts of the grid state.
```

This is due to performance implications related to how Emotion injects styles into the page.
To keep the performance of our virtualization engine at its optimal we decided to keep the CSS specificity of 2 for the mentioned components.

## v4 migration

> You can check [this spage](https://mui.com/components/data-grid/migration-v4/) to learn more about migrating to v5.

Author: Updated. I added some explanation why its a good idea to update to v5.

## What's next?

> More exciting things are coming! We have big plans for this last quarter of 2021 in terms of features we plan to make available to both `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components. Things like **tree data**, **column pinning** and **variable row height** are part of our roadmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More exciting things are coming! We have big plans for the rest of this quarter in terms of features we expect to release in both the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components. Features such as **tree data**, **column pinning**, and **variable row height** are part of our roadmap.
```

> ### A public roadmap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Public roadmap
```
